---
layout: post
title:  "The Science of Calm"
date:   2025-07-04 22:43 -0400
categories: Kava Herbs
---

Imagine sitting on the beaches of Fiji, the sun gently setting over the horizon. A group of locals gathers around a campfire, sharing drinks from coconut shells. They offer you a shell with the cheerful greeting, “Bula!” As you take your first sip, you quickly realize the drink is not what you expected—it's a spicy, earthy drink filled with regret as your whole mouth goes numb. But before long, you feel a wave of relaxation and calm and the regret fades away. Congratulations! You've just participated in a centuries-old tradition. Welcome to Fiji. The beverage is called Kava, scientifically known as Piper methysticum, and it originates from the islands of the South Pacific, including Fiji, Vanuatu, Tonga, and Samoa. This often misunderstood psychoactive drink, has unique properties. Unlike many substances, it does not cause physical addiction, and it has minimal impact on your health. It provides a calming effect similar to alcohol or Xanax. 

There are two primary types of Kava found in the wild: Tudei Kava and Noble Kava. Noble Kava is the preferred variety, which you’ll typically find at local Kava bars, offers a more “energetic” experience, with the primary effects lasting around 30 minutes, followed by the “Kava glow” lasting anywhere from 2 to 6 hours. In stark contrast, Tudei Kava, aptly named for having effects that last up to “two day”, which may be undesirable to some. These negative effects are generally absent in modern Kava cultivars, as they have been selectively bred to eliminate them (Kalm with Kava, n.d.).

Each island in the Pacific produces a variety of Kava cultivars, much like the different types of wine or coffee. The effects of Kava are determined by its chemical profile, similar to the nutritional label you find in grocery stores. This profile, called a chemotype, indicates the specific effects that a given variety might have. Some types of Kava are described as "heady," others as "heavy," while some fall in between, offering a balanced experience. When compared to cannabis, heady and heavy are similar to heady and heavy. Kava contains a total of eighteen kavalactones and kavoflavins, but only six numbered kavalactones that we care for. Kava chemotypes are classified by these six main compounds, with the leading number indicating the highest concentration of a particular kavalactone. What makes Kava particularly interesting is the synergistic effect of these compounds. When scientists isolated individual kavalactones and tested them, they found that the effects were not nearly as potent to the experience when the compounds were combined in their natural proportions (Melo Melo Kava Bar, 2022).

Kava primarily works by enhancing the activity of GABA-A receptors—much like benzodiazepines or alcohol. Its active compounds, known as kavalactones, also inhibit the reuptake of norepinephrine and possibly dopamine, and act as reversible, though weak, monoamine oxidase inhibitors. Interestingly, one of these kavalactones even binds to the cannabinoid CB1 receptor, similar to how cannabis works. The calming, anti-anxiety effects of kava are thought to come mainly from its action on GABA receptors, while the potential elevation of dopamine at higher doses may explain its mild psychotropic effects. All this makes kava a unique substance that can be used medicinally—or even recreationally—as a potent, natural alternative to more conventional substances (PsychedSubstance, 2017). 

Kava has had numerous studies on its medicinal, recreational, and harmful effects, the latter being highly contested subject. Research has been conducted on Kava's potential to cause liver damage. A study from the National Library of Medicine examined the hypothesis that Kava in any form could be toxic to the liver. However, the findings indicated that liver toxicity was more closely associated with low-quality Kava, non-traditional preparation methods, and Kava extracts. In fact, it is rare for Kava to cause liver damage, and such incidents typically occur in individuals who mix Kava with alcohol or regularly consume low-quality Kava products (Teschke & Stickel, 2013). Another study from the National library of medicine shows how Kava in small doses can be used daily to treat General Anxiety Disorder (Sarris et al., 2011). The final study I will talk about from BMC Medicine, shows the potential of kava being used as a form of tobacco and nicotine cessation (Sarris et al., 2024)

In my personal experience, kava has produced effects similar to the start of a psychedelic trip mostly due to the altered headspace and introspective qualities often associated with cannabis. At higher doses, I have had physical impairment that caused slurred speech and difficulty keeping balance. However, at lower doses, these intense effects are nonexistent. Instead, kava tends to promote a sense of calm, reduced anxiety, improved mood, and increased sociability, comparable to the effects of alcohol but without the same level of cognitive impairment.
	
### References
1. Kalm with Kava. (n.d.). Noble Kava vs. Tudei Kava: What’s the difference? https://kalmwithkava.com/noble-kava-vs-tudei-kava/
2. Melo Melo Kava Bar. (2022, January 22). The chemistry of Kava. https://melomelokavabar.com/2022/01/chemistry-of-kava/
3. PsychedSubstance. (2017, January 15). KAVA Live experience + overview video. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CyYW9JSxaQM
4. Sarris, J., Byrne, G. J., Stough, C., Bousman, C., Cribb, L., & Savage, K. M. (2011). Kava in the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder: A double-blind randomized, placebo-controlled study. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 31(6), 643–648. https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4630875/
5. Sarris, J., Sinclair, J., Stough, C., Cribb, L., Bousman, C., & Camfield, D. (2024). Kava for smoking cessation: A randomised placebo-controlled trial. BMC Complementary Medicine and Therapies, 24(1). https://bmccomplementmedtherapies.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12906-024-04722-9
6. Teschke, R., & Stickel, F. (2013). Kava hepatotoxicity: A clinical review. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 14(11), 21120–21147. https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3269575/
